In recent years, industrial Augmented Reality (AR) applications are more and more shifting from research into productive use. Although many of them are still tested in pilot applications. There are some already in use at the shop floor [1]. However, for these applications to succeed on a broad scale in the future, not just connections to the company's product data management (PDM) system will be essential. A PDM system is used to manage all data relevant for production from design to service and can be compared to a version control system known from software engineering. One additional goal to achieve is the connection of the AR applications with the machines numerical controls (NC). However, this is especially tough when concerning the security issues and deterministic real-time behavior of the NC controls.

An AR application that succeeded with this task was the Virtual Press demonstrator on the Bosch Rexroth AG exhibition stands on Hannover Messe 2015 [2] and an upgraded version of it on Euro-Blech 2016 [3], presented in this paper. It was one of the first industrial AR applications that succeeded in the bi-directiona1 connection with an NC control.

The next section will give a concise technical description of the Virtual Press demonstrator followed by a section about the technical background used for developing. From this, an outlook on the future work in the Horizion2020 project PreCoM (Predictive Cognitive Maintenance Decision Support System) will be given on how to use and extend that technology for three different maintenance use cases in manufacturing.

The Virtual Press demonstrator consists of some real press components (motors, pumps, hydraulic components, part transfer etc.) on a frame, a real machine control system and an AR application (see Figure 1) [2]. The other press components (matrix, tool etc.) and the motion of the press are virtual. On a mobile device, the complete press and its motions are visible and can be controlled. With this system, the products and processes can be easily explained using 3D models and additional information. Furthermore, simulations and complex functions of the press can be shown and evaluated. For the AR application, the framework ARViewer is used (see section 3.1). The AR application is connected directly with the machine control system of the demonstrator using Bluetooth (see section 3.2) to show the live data from the press components on the mobile device and to control the speed of the real part transfer. Security and safety issues were addressed by installing a security laser scanner at the demonstrator shutting it down in case somebody got too close. For the exact overlaying of the virtual press over the real press, a tracking system is required. The challenging part here is the very large frame (approx. 4.30 m) of the real press where the real parts are attached. It only has few distinguishing features and is not fully in the image from most viewing positions. A number of different tracking methods were tested. Finally, marker-based tracking was chosen because of the best stability.

The AR framework ARViewer [4] was developed to test new AR scenarios in manufacturing by implementing only the new AR content and not the underlying AR technology. To use different technologies, the framework consists of different modules for image recording, tracking, graphics and data management. The image recording is used to visualize the camera image on a screen an as an input for the tracking (see Figure 2). Various interfaces for different camera types are available. The tracking detects the real objects in the environment and calculates the position, orientation and size of the virtual objects. With the implemented architecture, different tracking methods can be used. Graphic objects have to be imported from an external source for the special application scenario and are visualized by the OGRE3D [5] graphic engine. In addition, there are different external data interfaces available, which provide a connection to different data sources, e.g. machine control systems. A key benefit that is achieved through the modular architecture of the ARViewer is that the output devices (e.g. tablet PCs, AR glasses etc.) and tracking libraries (e.g. Metaio [6], ARToolKit [7], ArUco [8], custom-made etc.) can be easily switched without changing the actual AR scene. Therefore, with the ARViewer, new AR scenarios can be efficiently created and tested by concentrating on the AR content and without programing.

The described Virtual Press demonstrator (see section 2) proofed that a complex industrial AR application including a bi-directional connection with a machine control can be achieved. It further demonstrated that this marketing application runs stable with multiple AR devices used by hundreds of different users.

Starting from this background, the ARViewer framework (see section 3) shall be used to develop three industrial maintenance demonstrator within in the PreCoM project (Predictive Cognitive Maintenance Decision Support System) to support the workers to more efficiently perform the maintenance activities. The project will deploy and test a predictive cognitive maintenance decision-support system able to identify and localize damage, assess damage severity, predict damage evolution, assess remaining asset life, reduce the probability of false alarms, provide more accurate failure detection, issue notices to conduct preventive maintenance actions and ultimately increase in-service efficiency of machines. The three manufacturing use case targeted in PreCoM are complementary and represent a broad spectrum within the manufacturing industry.

The first use case represents a low volume manufacturer that produces large-scale parts for wind power plants using milling machines. The second use case will focus on high volume manufacturing of parts for precision reduction gears using grinding machines. The third use case handles the continuous manufacturing of pulp and paper where the yankee dryer cylinder is crucial for production by providing high quality steam.

Given the nature of the use cases, three very different AR maintenance support applications have to be developed simultaneously. They all have to be connected to several third party systems. First of all, a connection to the also in PreCoM developed predictive maintenance platform has to be established. From here, maintenance relevant information will have to be derived from, like the parts to be changed and the underlying reasons. Secondly, a connection to the companies PDM systems must exist. Important 3D construction data, installation guidelines, documentation files about previously performed maintenances and instructions will have to be derived from the PDM systems and processed, so that it is suitable for AR. A third connection has to be established to the machines NC controls that the worker has direct access to the data needed to perform the maintenance task at the place of work without needing to move to the NC control itself.

For the concurrent development of these AR applications, the ARViewer will be used to speed up development as it provides functionalities for fast user interface creation and content containers. It is further also able to use existing connectors to common NC controls. Additional programming effort will have to go into the connection to the individual PDM system and the processing of that data. The ARViewer has foreseen a mechanism to seamlessly integrate such programed extensions into its architecture. The same applies for the connection to the PreCoM predictive maintenance platform where also a new connection has to be developed to be able to use this data in the AR application.

One additional challenging part during the development will be the tracking. For that, several different marker-based and marker-less tracking approaches will be evaluated to find the most suitable solution for each use case in the given industrial surrounding. To find the best AR device for each use case, AR head mounted displays (HMDs) and tablet computers will be evaluated regarding their usability in the industrial environments and the workers acceptance to use them.

After the applications are developed, an evaluation with workers from the companies will verify the quality of the developed AR maintenance applications and the new maintenance processes.